# XORDLE

#### Description:

My project is a simple game written in Python. It is named Xordle as the game is based upon the original game known 'Wordle'. The program consists of 2 main files: main.py and dictionary.txt. main.py contains the main body of code from the program. It calls many libraries to assist in writing the code such as random from which I import everything and later use for its randint function which picks a random integer although it is not truly random as no computer can generate something truly random. Primarily the library PyGame is imported along with sys. PyGame allows the program to easily generate a GUI that is easy and intuitive for the user to interact with. It provides a clear and familiar GUI resembling one similar to that of the game 'Wordle'. PyGame allows for me to have many functions that can be used to create a GUI by drawing to the screen different shapes of varying colours mostly by defining the X and Y co-ordinates of the element to be drawn to the screen. Sys is the last library that is imported, it allows me to have many more low level functions, with it I can exit the program easily and handle/manipulate the command line inputs. It provides access to variables used and maintained by the Python interpreter which therefore gives me function that interact strongly with the interpreter itself. These libraries are imported by the code:
```Python
import pygame, sys
from pygame.locals import QUIT
from random import *
from random import randint
```

##### GAME EXPLAINED

The game works by selecting a random work from an external file. The screen then displays a 5x6 grid containing 5 columns and 6 rows. This signifies the input size being 5 letter long words and that the user has 6 attempts. The user will have the opportunity to guess a 5 letter word. The program that outputs to the screen several different colours behind each letter of that word to signify the result of the users guess. If the box behind the letter turns grey then it means that letter is not in the word at all. If it turns green then that letter is in fact in the word and it is in the correct place. For exameple if the 2nd letter guessed was A and the box behind it became green then the second letter of the word must be A. Lastly, if the background becomes orange then the letter is in the word however it is currently in the wrong position. The user can guess up to 6 words which will all be tracked and displayed upon the screen. The game will end once the user correctly guesses the word and hence all the boxes in one row are green or the user runs out of guesses and has used all 6 guesses. The user enters their guess via the console by typing in the word when prompted and pressing enter. The program has error handling and many instructions output to the console so it is easy for the user to follow along.

##### FUNCTIONS AND PROGRAM EXPLAINED

Firstly the program begins by importing the additional libraries needed for the game to work as intended. Then I define global variables that I will later use especially for the PyGame library as I often have to reference dimensions of the window that I display to and the X and Y co-ordinates of these elements I display. Next I have a 2D array that is used to store the colour variables for each box that will be displayed to the screen. It is then followed by another 2D array called 'guessedLetters' which contains several rows of empty strings to act as the mask that will be applied over the boxes so that the user can see the words and letters that they have input into the game appear on the screen. I have used 2D arrays as it makes it easy to access each item in these data structures as well as alter and reference the items. This means that it is easy for me to maintain this data in the program which ensures I was able to always have the correct information being fed to the screen and displayed which is crucial for the user experience as this is a game. The program then initiates PyGame and defines the size of the window that will act as the screen that the user can see and interact with. I then open the other file in the directory 'dictionary.txt'. This file contains over 2000 words of which the game can choose. After many global variables and arrays are defined the function 'select_word' then manipulates the external file 'dictionary.txt' to sanitise it and get an array of all the words in the file and then randomly chooses one of these words making use of the random library and the randint function. The function returns the word that the game will play with. Then the next function 'dash' takes the parameter words which it will then loop through printing out underscores for the each spot in the word which is then printed to the console, this is to ensure there is also a good amount of user interaction in the console and will help the user to respond as they must enter their inputs into the console. The function writeLetter, printWord and addLetters all allow the users input to be displayed in the game and on the screen as they guess, it also ensures their guess stays on the screen. Lastly, there is the main function where the core code and logic of the program resides.

##### MAIN

In main I render UI elements on the screen using functions from PyGame such as 'render'. It then uses many constructs to create the actual logic of the program that dictates how the game is played including checking when a box needs to be changed to a colour and what colour that should be. Then they are updated by altering the specific item in the 2D array containing colours for each box this then allows me to easily and efficiently edit the colour without making mistakes and without having to run any more PyGame commands and long lines of code. I also have to then initially display the grid by drawing rectanges using code from the PyGame library. This has been done by:
```Python
 Box1a = pygame.draw.rect(win, (colours[0][0]), (x,y,50,50))
 Box1b = pygame.draw.rect(win, (colours[0][1]), (x+75,y,50,50))
 Box1c = pygame.draw.rect(win, (colours[0][2]), (x+150,y,50,50))
 Box1d = pygame.draw.rect(win, (colours[0][3]), (x+225,y,50,50))
 Box1e = pygame.draw.rect(win, (colours[0][4]), (x+300,y,50,50))
```
This is an example of just one of the 6 rows. Since when I change colour I just update the 2D array 'colours' I dont have to repeat these lines of code and recreate these boxes. The function also takes the users input and has error handling to ensure there is no incorrect or malicious inputs. Lastly, the boxes are redrawn when the user wins the game to ensure the board is correctly displayed with the correct information and that all the boxes appear green once the correct word is entered.

##### CHALLENGES FACED

I faced many challenges whilst creating this program, firstly I had to come up with a solution to creating a GUI or some interface where the user can see and play the game. I had tried some libraries that would output colour in the console such as colorama and rich amongst others however, these weren't that nice and didnt give me my desired effect so I ended up deciding to use PyGame which I knew of and was briefly aware of its capabilities as I have many friends who have previously used it for projects. After extensively researching PyGame and reading its documentation I was then able to create a basic GUI that I used to help me then further test the logic of the program which I had initially written but struggled to debug and fix without the GUI especially as I had many empty and unfinished sections due to know having yet implemented the PyGame code for the GUI. Another issue I ran into was the implementation of adding the text of what the user had inputted on top of the boxes in the GUI. This led to a long time of trying different solutions which I ultimately managed to solve by implementing 3 new functions and a 2D array. However, this solution was not quickly reached and took a large chunk of development time. Another smaller issue that I encountered was making it change the letters to also be green when the user had won the game and guessed the word correctly, it would simply stay the same display and then exit the game, to fix this I had to draw out the boxes once again when they had won the game and this subsequently fixed the issue. So deleting the second drawing of the boxes will break the UI.

##### WHY I USED TECHNOLOGIES

I used PyGame due to its effectivity and ability to create high quality UIs simply and easily, it allowed me to create an intuitive UI that was easy to use by many people and that looked decently good. The limiting factor to its graphical aesthetic was my coding and experience using PyGame. I used random for its randint function as it a vastly used and incredibly popular library that is used by almost everyone for anything to do with random variables and choosing random things. I have previously discussed why I used 2D arrays throughout this document but I will reiterate its ability to easily maintain and change data. It is also a simple and effective way of storing data in a moderately complex form that resembles a table.

##### WHAT DID I LEARN

I learnt to use the PyGame module in Python, I learnt to use a variety of different constructs within in Python including OOP and creating classes which although is not in the final code was earlier used when I was trying other things and solutions to my problems. I was able to practice and improve my confidence programming in Python. I used many functions which allowed me to see the benefit of modular programming and using a modular approach, I also practiced using it and implementing it to solve problems.

##### WHAT IS REQUIRED FOR THE PROGRAM

The requirements for the program to work are the Python Interpreter as well as having the required libraries installed including: random, sys and PyGame. It also requires the external file 'dictionary.txt' or any other text file with the same layout and name that contains a long list of 5 letter words.
